
Hello. In this video, I'm going to give a
demo of the [inaudible]; a research
project in Stanford University for helping
students learn formal systems in online
classes. The basic idea behind the
[inaudible] is to allow students to work
through formal derivations and to have
their improving technology that will check
that those derivations are correct. So you
can actually learn the details of how
formal reasoning works. So let's take a
look at an example here. So here is a
little exercise in algebra and our goal is
to prove that [inaudible]. Is equal to
eleven, all right? That's what we're
trying to accomplish and where we start is
with the equation two * x + -four = x +
seven. So in general, there could be more
than one initial given assumption in this
particular exercise so it's just one and
we wanna start with that equation and we
want to prove that x = eleven. And to get
there, we're allowed to use any of the
rules that are listed here that I'm
circling with the mouse. And these were
also divided into two kinds. There are the
required rules which is this first set
here at the top. And, the required rules
are required. So, whenever we have a step
of [inaudible] that uses one of these
rules, we have to name it explicitly, we
have to show that stuff explicitly. And
then there are some rules that are
considered free. These are the rules we
don't have to show. So for example, we
don't have to show all these steps
involving associatively of addition and
multiplication, presumably our instructors
decide we are already understand that and
we're allowed to skip over those steps and
the system will try to fill them in. So
these rules out here we can show them if
we like, but they're not required. We're
allowed to skip these steps. All right, so
let's begin with. On this and every step
of the derivation is going to have three
parts. It's gonna have a conclusion. So
something that we, we are proving at this
particular stuff and we're gonna have the
justification. So the rule from which that
step follows. And then finally, what
previous facts we're using that we already
knew to be true. All right, So why, what
we started with, what rule we apply to it
and then what we concluded from it? All
right? So, what can we do to make progress
in this example? Well, one thing we could
do is we can add four to both sides of the
equation. Okay. And why is that justified?
What rule are we using? Well, that's the
balance equation using addition rule up
here which says it's okay to add the same
thing both sides of the equation. So, we
would select that rule out of the list of
possible rules. Okay. And then what
assumption are we using? Well, there's
only one thing that we've got at the
moment. That's the initial given that we
would begin with. All right, So here, we
have one step of our derivation. We think
this is right. We click update proof and
the system. Comes back and says indeed,
yes. That was a valid step of the
derivation. So now, let's do another step.
Well actually, let's see what would happen
here if we did this balance equation step
incorrectly. Let's say we didn't add the
same thing to both sides. And so, let's
try that out and what do we get? Oh, we
see, then now it comes back to color red
indicating there's something wrong and
we're not given another step here to fill
in, okay, because there was an incorrect
step. We also see there's this little
question mark icon here. We can click on
that. And it tells us something about what
went wrong and gives us some advice as it
balancing equation. Means you have to add
the same value to each side of the
equation. Okay. So with that advice,
presumably we will be able to figure out
what we did wrong and correct this step.
And get back to a place where we're on
track. Now as you say there's not always
advice available for every incorrect step
but if it is available, you know you can
click on that and get some idea of what it
is you might have done wrong. All right so
now let's go on. Let's take a look at this
and see what we could do. We can try to
simplify the left hand si de here. So,
that's = two * x on the left hand side and
the right hand side x + seven + four and
we think we can do this here because you
know? Four + -four are that's just adding
constants and that's one of our free
rules, okay? So we're allowed to add up
constants, you know? At the end and
getting zero there should be something we
can do for free, all right? And that
follows our previous step. Let me select
that and now we can do an update and it
comes back and it says, oh we did
something wrong so it doesn't immediately
follow from the previous step and there's
actually empty here so we can see why and
we see oh, it says [inaudible] identity is
a required rule and so what mistake did we
make? Well, you know it was okay to add
four and -four together and get zero, I'm
not sure of that because that was, that
was just adding and multiplying constants
but then the sub-sequence step when we
said the two*x+0 = two*x that it was
something. They were actually required to
show in this exercise. So, whenever we use
that identity we have to explicitly say
so, so we can, we can fix that. By saying
that you know this rule actually, this
step actually, this step actually follows
[inaudible] identity from the previous one
and all the other rules that we're using
that stuff for free so we don't have to
name them, alright. So now we can go on.
We can although simplify the left hand
side. We might have clean that up and
that's just free rules so we don't have to
say exactly which rule we're using and I
think I didn't take the update there,
okay. So now, I guess I hit it twice by
accident so let's just get rid of one of
these steps, okay. So now what's the next
step we're going to perform? It looks like
we need to bring x over to the left hand
side. So, we're going to add a -x to both
sides so two * x + -x = x + eleven + -x,
okay? And that's again the balance
equation using addition rule and that
follows from our previous step, okay? And,
we can get from that one, all right? And
then we'll update that, t hat works just
fine. Okay? And now we can do some
simplification of the left hand side,
sorry excuse me, on the right hand side
because all of these over be here is just
= eleven, okay? And, and then we're having
to use x + -x = zero and then we're just
adding eleven and zero so we're just count
this...adding up constants so this should
follow from additive inverse From the
previous step. All right, If we update
that yes that worked out fine and now we
just have to work on the left hand side.
We've got two * x + -x and in order to get
that into a form where we can simplify it,
we're gonna need to use the Distributive
Rule. We need to pull out the constants
that are in front of the x's. And so, we
can do that. We can say that two + (-one)
* x = eleven. And so, we're using
distributivity there but we're also using
the unary negation rule that says, you
know, -x = -one * x. But that's a free
rule so we don't have to worry about that.
So the only rule we need to name is the
distributivity rule. And that falls from
the previous step with the deliberation.
We update that, okay. And now we're just
about there so now I think in one step we
can do the simplification. We can subtract
one from two and get one and then we have
one*x = eleven. That's multiplicative
identity which is a required rule for this
flicker exercise. Falls with the previous
step like all the other, like all the
previous steps and now we're done. And
then we prove that x = eleven says who
knows we have finished the assignment and
that is the basic idea behind the
[inaudible]. And, while this particular
example was algebra this can be done for
any kind of formal system where you can
present the kinds of exercises you want to
do in the set of rules and the students
are supposed to derive some kind of goal
using those rules.
